Title: Planning small web projects
Description: Things to keep in mind when transitioning from making simple web sites built by a single person to building applications and larger sites using smaller teams.
Tag: Transition
Tag: Planning

Transitioning from making simple web sites with a one person 'team', to handling bigger and more complex web projects can be a bumpy ride for web agencies. This post will discuss some of the problems that may be encountered and ideas for easing the growing pains.

h2 Projects with no finish line

A small startup will want to do everything to please their first customers, including over delivering on projects, aka Gold plating. The problem with this attitude, as workloads and complexities increase, is that the focus of the project is to please the client, rather than deliver what was agreed upon. This lack of focus on defining and delivering to the agreed specification may prevent projects from being finished as know one knows what finished is.

h2 Saying yes, too often

The client is always right is wrong. Being a professional means helping clients solve their projects in the best ways, this also means saying no to requests that are not the best solution. To be able to say no requires being frank and giving sound reasons for why your solution is better. Of course saying yes also means clients could end up getting extras done for free.

h2 Writing things down

For small projects it is sufficient to verbally agree on everything because there is only one or two people involved. Bigger projects require explicitly documenting and planning so that everyone can, literally, be on the same page. Todo list managers can be a great aid in capturing requirements, tracking what is left to do and help ensure tasks don't slip through the cracks.

h2 Estimating unknowns

Estimation should be a formal process, if it is done by picking numbers out of the blue and shooting of an email information can soon be lost between the contract being sent and the client signing. Writing down what exactly has been included in the project price helps define scope and avoid gold plating. By keeping track of estimation data and historical time usage details of actual projects allows future estimations to be based on past performance and the ability to learn from past mistakes.

h2 Premier everyday

If projects are run without a defined plan, chances are they are run differently each time. Maybe one project gets the estimation right but forgets to define a communication plan, another may screw up change management. The point is unless projects have a defined process to guide them it is like doing something for the first time. A project process acts as a organizational memory, by tweaking the process and adding to it, over time projects will start avoid pitfalls of previous ones.

Handling bigger projects requires more attention to detail and working more systematically. This may seem as more paperwork, but working methodically and projectively will save several hart attacks down the road.
